---
title: "Cider\U0001F34E\U0001F37B"
layout: post
date: 2018-07-28 10:43:14 -0700
tags:
- fermentation
- brewing

---
## 7/28/18

This is an experiment in using commercial yeast.

I picked Red Star Premier Blanc, a champagne yeast, because I like dry cider.

I'm also adding Wyeast Beer Nutrient Blend based on frequent references in online cider resources to adding yeast nutrient, and this product seemed to have nice stuff in it.

I bought both off Amazon, in addition to an air lock appropriate for a 1 gallon apple juice bottle. I chose a single chamber air lock because that's what a friend lent me before, and I appreciate the simplicity.

The yeast packet recommended starting the yeast in a quarter cup of 95°F to 100°F water. I didn't want to dilute the juice, so I used juice instead of water.

Microwaving a quarter cup of liquid for thirty seconds brought it to \~100°, measured using a Thermopen.

The 5 gram yeast packet contained enough for five gallons, so I measured \~2 grams using my wife's baking scale.

The scale didn't support fractional grams, so I just added a dash of yeast nutrient.

I microwaved a quarter cup of juice and pitched the yeast and nutrient in.

Within a couple minutes the yeast started bubbling! This was very different from wild yeasting where I'd wait for a few days before anything happened.

After the 20 minutes recommended by the yeast packet, I poured the yeast slurry into the juice in the 1 gallon jug and fitted the airlock, sanitized by wiping with a vodka-soaked paper towel.

I still prefer the informal approach of wild yeasting, but am looking forward to a more fully fermented cider.

In future, I'd like to experiment with wild yeasting a starter, and if it tastes good, using that with the process described above for full fermentation.

## 7/14/18

I've tried making cider a [couple times](https://twitter.com/erikeldridge/status/785273129236992000) and my favorite is an informal approach inspired by the ["Lifelong cider maker" anecdote in Sandor Katz's Art of Fermentation](https://books.google.com/books?id=TjXEAgAAQBAJ&pg=PA85&dq=lifelong+cider+maker '"Lifelong cider maker" from Art of Fermentation'):

> I learned the crude technique at Quaker boarding school. Everyone there stuffed gallons of cider in clothes closets. Open jug, pour some out, leave lid raised on one side, then let it sit in the closet until it stopped bubbling.

In my case, I buy a 32 oz bottle of something I'd want to drink in any case, like North Coast's organic gravenstein apple juice, and then leave it on the kitchen counter with cheesecloth over the top. If I can get fresh, organic apples or stone fruit, I'll chop one up and throw it in hoping yeast from the orchard is riding along.

Bubbling starts after few days. Seeing it makes me happy, a bit of the natural world indoors. Consistent with an informal approach, and following Katz's advice for [spontaneous cider in Wild Fermentation](https://books.google.com/books?id=Eq7sDAAAQBAJ&q=spontaneous+cider '"spontaneous cider" in Wild Fermentation'), I like to drink it early and often, rather than trying to optimize and risking colonization by vinegar bacteria.

If mold grows on the froth, I scoop it off with a spoon, as we would with sauerkraut,  and "rack" the juice through a strainer (to catch the froth) into another bottle, leaving the sediment behind.

I finish the bottle in a week or so and then start again :)